# landscape_ecotoxicology

This code is associated with the publication:  
### The Use of Geographic Information Systems for SpatialEcological Risk Assessments: An Example from theAthabasca Oil Sands Area in Canada

Eccles, K. M., Pauli, B. D., & Chan, H. M. (2019). The use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for spatial ecological risk assessments: An example from the Athabasca oil sands area in Canada. Environmental toxicology and chemistry, 38(12): 2797–2810.

Abstract: There is an acknowledged need in ecotoxicology for methods that integrate spatial analyses in risk assessment.This has resulted in the emergence of landscape ecotoxicology, a subdiscipline of ecotoxicology. However, landscapeecotoxicology has yet to become common practice in risk assessment due to the underdevelopment of techniques and a lackof standardized methods. In the present study, we demonstrate how geographic information systems (GISs) can serve as astandardized platform to integrate data, assess spatial patterns of ecotoxicological data for multiple species, and assessrelationships between chemical mixture exposures and effects on biota for landscape ecotoxicological risks assessment. Weuse data collected under the Joint Oil Sands Monitoring Program in the Athabasca Oil Sands Region in Alberta, Canada. Thisdataset is composed of concentrations of contaminants including metals and polycyclic aromatic compounds, and healthendpoints measured in 1100 biological samples, including tree swallows, amphibians, gull and tern eggs, plants, andmammals. We present 3 examples using a GIS as a platform and geospatial analysis to: 1) integrate data and assess spatialpatterns of contaminant exposure in the region, 2) assess spatial patterns of exposures to complex mixtures, and 3) examinepatterns of exposures and responses across the landscape. We summarize the methods used in the present study into aworkflow for ease of use. The GIS methods allow researchers to identify hot spots of contamination, use georeferencedmonitoring data to derive quantitative exposure‐response relationships, and assess complex exposures with more realism.
